@document.meta
title: Space, Time and Motion
description: 
authors: Sean Carroll
categories: [
  physics
]
created: 2023-06-18
updated: 2023-06-21
version: 1.1.1
@end

* Summary

* 1: Conservation
** Predictability

   > The most basic kind of predictability is *conservation*, the fact that
   > some things don't change at all

  $ Conservation
   Staying constant over time

   Energy can be thought of as a property of an object, instead of a substance
   itself. An object can have energy because it's moving, is warm, located high
   above the ground and so on. *Conservation* of energy is then the idea that
   this total of energy doesn't vanish, but is translated between various
   _states_ 

   $ Mass
   The resistance an object has to being accelerated

   The *momentum* of an object is /mass * velocity/ if relativity is ignored,
   or /p = mv/

** Classical Mechanics
   Invented by /Isaac Newton/ in 1687, *Classical Mechanics* (CM) is theory
   that the world adheres to definite, measurable values and deterministic
   rules. It can be thought of as a counterpart to *Quantum Mechanics*, but you
   don't quite know what that is yet. A subset of CM is then *Newtonian
   Mechanics* which adds ideas about space and time

  > Classical mechanics is a theory of patterns, rather than natures or
  > cause/effect relations, because it doesn't ask "What is the natural state
  > of the system? or "What caused the system to move in that way?" All it asks
  > is "What is the system doing at this particular moment?"

*** Conservation of Information
   From the deterministic descriptors of the world of CM there is the
   capability of /describing the system at any point in time, given the
   complete state of the system at any other point in time/. Notice that the
   statement made no assumptions as to the ordering of the two points. We could
   just aswell describe the past as we can describe the future. 

   This concept was implied in CM and not brought out into the light until 1814
   by /Pierre-Simon *Laplace*/ and is called *Conservation of Information*.

   As an aside, this aligns perfectly with your fiery-hot take that everything
   is predetermined. The initial conditions at the beginning of the universe,
   completely determine what happens today.

*** Conservation of Energy

    $ Kinetic energy
    E = 1/2 * mv²,
    where E and m are scalars (energy and mass respectively) and v is the
    velocity. Velocity squared is taken to mean the dot product.

    $ Potential energy
    E = mgh,
    where m is the mass, g is the gravitational constant (on Earth this is 9.8)
    and h is the elevation.

    If a ball is rolling on a frictionless hill, the total energy E_kin + E_pot
    remains constant. As the ball lies near motionless at the top, it will have
    a large amount of potential energy, but as it starts rolling down the hill,
    it will be converted into kinetic energy.


  $ Einstein's equation
  R_{mu nu} - 1/2 Rg_{mu nu} = 8pi GT_{mu nu}



